Add Astro 5.1 blog (#1355)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/astro-510.mdx

---
title: "Astro 5.1"
description: "Astro 5.1 is now available. This includes a new experimental sessions feature, improved caching for images, and new tools for building Astro Actions."
homepageLink:
  title: "Astro 5.1"
  subtitle: "Available now!"
publishDate: "2024-12-17"
authors:
  - matt
coverImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-510/blog-post-5-1.webp"
socialImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-510/og-astro-5-1.webp"
lang: "en"
---

import BlogContentImage from "/src/components/BlogContentImage.astro";

**Astro 5.1 is now available! Delivered just in time for the holidays, the first minor release of the Astro 5 era includes a new experimental sessions feature, improved caching for images, and extra tools for building Astro Actions.**

The gifts it bears include:

- [**Remote image caching**](#remote-image-caching)

> - [**Experimental: Sessions**](#experimental-sessions)

Reviewer: I would move experimental sessions first, since it's the biggest feature of the release

- [**`getActionPath` helper**](#getactionpath-helper)

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Remote image caching

Astro sites can use the built-in `<Image />` component to [display optimized images](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/images/#display-optimized-images-with-the-image--component) with automatic resizing and optimization. This works with both local and remote images. 

> Astro already caches transformed local images between builds, but previously did not cache remote images. Now, Astro will cache remote images as well, reducing the need to re-download and re-transform images on every build. It uses conditional requests with `If-Modified-Since` or `If-None-Match` headers to determine whether the image is still fresh, and will use the cached version unless the source image has changed. 

Reviewer: I would add MDN links to these special headers

### Usage

To try experimental sessions, add a `sessions` key to your `astro.config.mjs`:

This example shows how to enable the filesystem driver, which works with the Node.js adapter:

> ```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={4-8}
> 	{
>     adapter: node({ mode: 'standalone' }),
> 		experimental: {
>       session: {
>         // Required: the name of the Unstorage driver
>         driver: "fs",
>       },
>     },
> 	}
> ```

Reviewer: There are mixed tabs and spaces
``````suggestion
```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={4-8}
{
  adapter: node({ mode: 'standalone' }),
  experimental: {
    session: {
      // Required: the name of the Unstorage driver
      driver: "fs",
    },
  },
}
```
``````

The gifts it comes bearing include:

- [**Experimental: Sessions**](#experimental-sessions)
- [**Remote image caching**](#remote-image-caching)
- [**`getActionPath` helper**](#getactionpath-helper)

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Experimental: Sessions

If you’ve built apps with frameworks like Rails or Laravel, you’re probably familiar with sessions: a simple way to keep track of per-user data like login status, flash messages, or shopping carts as users navigate your site. Sessions let you securely store temporary data tied to a specific user – with no client-side storage required. Currently you might store data in a cookie or local storage, but that can be insecure or cumbersome – or has limits on how much data you can store. 

> Sessions work by storing data on the server, and only sending a session ID as a cookie to the client. You can then get and set the session data in your Astro pages, API endpoints, Astro Actions, and middleware. The API and data are the same for each of them. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sessions work by storing data on the server, and only sending a session ID as a cookie to the client. You can then get and set the session data in your Astro pages and components, API endpoints, Astro Actions, and middleware. The API and data are the same for each of them. 
```
We even show an example of this being used in a component, so probably worth mentioning here!

In Astro components and pages, you can access the session object as `Astro.session`:

```astro 
---
// src/components/CartButton.astro
export const prerender = false;
const cart = await Astro.session.get('cart');
---

<a href="/cart">🛒 {cart?.length ?? 0} items</a>
```
The same session data is available in your Astro Actions:

```ts {9,11}
// src/actions/addToCart.ts
import { defineAction } from "astro:actions";
import { z } from "astro:schema";

export const server = {
  addToCart: defineAction({
    input: z.object({ productId: z.string() }),
    handler: async (input, context) => {
      const cart = await context.session.get("cart");
      cart.push(input.productId);
      await context.session.set("cart", cart);
      return cart;
    },
  }),
};
```

Sessions work on pages that are rendered on-demand, or they pair perfectly with [server islands](https://docs.astro.build/en/concepts/islands/#server-islands), letting you sprinkle islands of personalized content in an otherwise static site.

```astro
---
import CartButton from '../components/CartButton.astro';
---
<CartButton server:defer />
```

### Drivers

> Astro sessions are powered by [unstorage](https://unstorage.unjs.io/) drivers, which are modules that Astro uses to store the session data. Unstorage supports dozens of providers, giving you a world of choice for storing the user data. When sessions are a stable feature, adapters will automatically configure a default driver, but during the experimental phase you must choose and configure one yourself. When using the Node.js adapter, the best choice is usually the [filesystem driver](https://unstorage.unjs.io/drivers/fs), but this cannot be used in serverless environments as they have no shared filesystem. For these, the best default is usually the storage feature provided by the platform, such as the [Netlify Blobs driver](https://unstorage.unjs.io/drivers/netlify), the [Cloudflare KV driver](https://unstorage.unjs.io/drivers/cloudflare) or the [Deno KV driver](https://unstorage.unjs.io/drivers/deno). You can also use a cross-platform driver such as [Upstash](https://unstorage.unjs.io/drivers/upstash) or [Redis](https://unstorage.unjs.io/drivers/redis).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Astro sessions are powered by [unstorage](https://unstorage.unjs.io/) drivers, which are modules that Astro uses to store the session data. Unstorage supports dozens of providers, giving you a world of choice for storing the user data.

 When sessions are a stable feature, Astro's official adapters will automatically configure a default driver. But during this experimental phase you must configure a `driver` for your chosen adapter yourself. You can also use a cross-platform driver such as [Upstash](https://unstorage.unjs.io/drivers/upstash) or [Redis](https://unstorage.unjs.io/drivers/redis).
```
- Paragraph was kind of long, so broke up into explanation of a driver vs configuring one
- Details aren't necessary here I don't think! Key thing is that they're prepared to choose one and realize they have to configure it.
- I'm assuming we can only claim that *our* official adapters will configure a driver by default? We can't claim that community adapters will follow suit? (Or, will be ready upon launch of the stable feature?)
- wanted to include `driver` as a code reference in the text at least once, to reinforce that this is A Thing :tm:

### Usage

> To try experimental sessions, add a `sessions` key to your `astro.config.mjs`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To try experimental sessions, add the `experimental.sessions` flag to your `astro.config.mjs`:
```
We typically call these "flags"

This example shows how to enable the filesystem driver, which works with the Node.js adapter:

```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={4-8}
  {
    adapter: node({ mode: 'standalone' }),
    experimental: {
      session: {
        // Required: the name of the Unstorage driver
        driver: "fs",
      },
    },
  }
```

> For more information see [the docs for the experimental flag](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/experimental-flags/sessions/). We'd also appreciate your feedback on the feature. For more details, see [the Sessions RFC](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/pull/1055) and leave your comments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information see [the sessions docs for this experimental flag ](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/experimental-flags/sessions/). We'd also appreciate your feedback on the feature. For even more details, and to leave feedback and participate in the development of the feature, see [the Sessions RFC](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/pull/1055).
```

## Remote image caching

> Astro sites can use the built-in `<Image />` component to [display optimized images](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/images/#display-optimized-images-with-the-image--component) with automatic resizing and optimization. This works with both local and remote images. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You already know and love the built-in `<Image />` component to [display optimized images](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/images/#display-optimized-images-with-the-image--component) with automatic resizing and optimization. While this component currently transforms both local and remote images, image caching between builds was limited to local images. 
```
Getting the history out of the way sooner, and emphasizing what's old vs what's new with a tiny bit of framing, and fitting everything up until the "NOW...." part in this first paragraph.

> Astro already caches transformed local images between builds, but previously did not cache remote images. Now, Astro will cache remote images as well, reducing the need to re-download and re-transform images on every build. It uses [conditional requests](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Conditional_requests#conditional_headers) with [`If-Modified-Since`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/If-Modified-Since) or [`If-None-Match`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/If-None-Match) headers to determine whether the image is still fresh, and will use the cached version unless the source image has changed. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, Astro will cache remote images as well, reducing the need to re-download and re-transform images on every build. It uses [conditional requests](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Conditional_requests#conditional_headers) with [`If-Modified-Since`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/If-Modified-Since) or [`If-None-Match`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/If-None-Match) headers to determine whether the image is still fresh, and will use the cached version unless the source image has changed. 
```
Starting this paragraph with the more exciting "Now"

Astro 5.1 introduces a new helper function, `getActionPath()` to give you more flexibility when calling your action.

Need to authorize those likes? Call your `like` action passing the `Authorization` header and the [`keepalive`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Request/keepalive) option:

```astro title="src/components/my-component.astro" {8,11}
<script>
import { actions, getActionPath } from 'astro:actions'

await fetch(getActionPath(actions.like), {
  method: 'POST',
  headers: {
    'Content-Type': 'application/json',
    Authorization: 'Bearer YOUR_TOKEN'
  },
  body: JSON.stringify({ id: 'YOUR_ID' }),
  keepalive: true
})
</script>
```

For more information, see [the new `getActionPath()` documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/modules/astro-actions/#getactionpath).

## Bug fixes
We've had loads of great feedback since [the Astro 5 release](https://astro.build/blog/astro-5), and we've been working hard to fix the issues you've reported. See [the changelog](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/main/packages/astro/CHANGELOG.md) for all of the fixes since Astro 5.0.

> Thanks to everyone who contributed to this release, and to everyone who's been using Astro and sharing their feedback. We're excited to see what you build with Astro 5.1!

Author: Thanks to Sarah: ship it!

homepageLink:
  title: "Astro 5.1"
  subtitle: "Available now!"
publishDate: "2024-12-17"
authors:
  - matt
coverImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-510/blog-post-5-1.webp"
socialImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-510/og-astro-5-1.webp"
lang: "en"
---

import BlogContentImage from "/src/components/BlogContentImage.astro";

**Astro 5.1 is now available! Delivered just in time for the holidays, the first minor release of the Astro 5 era includes a new experimental sessions feature, improved caching for images, and extra tools for working with Astro Actions.**

The gifts it comes bearing include:

- [**Experimental: Sessions**](#experimental-sessions)
- [**Remote image caching**](#remote-image-caching)
- [**`getActionPath` helper**](#getactionpath-helper)

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Experimental: Sessions

> If you’ve built apps with frameworks like Rails or Laravel, you’re probably familiar with sessions: a simple way to keep track of per-user data like login status, flash messages, or shopping carts as users navigate your site. Sessions let you securely store temporary data tied to a specific user – with no client-side storage required. Currently you might store data in a cookie or local storage, but that can be insecure or cumbersome – or has limits on how much data you can store. 

Reviewer 3: comma nit
```suggestion
If you’ve built apps with frameworks like Rails or Laravel, you’re probably familiar with sessions: a simple way to keep track of per-user data like login status, flash messages, or shopping carts as users navigate your site. Sessions let you securely store temporary data tied to a specific user – with no client-side storage required. Currently, you might store data in a cookie or local storage, but that can be insecure or cumbersome – or has limits on how much data you can store. 
```

> Sessions work by storing data on the server, and only sending a session ID as a cookie to the client. You can then get and set the session data in your Astro pages and components, API endpoints, Astro Actions, and middleware. The API and data are the same for each of them. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sessions work by storing data on the server, and only sending a session ID as a cookie to the client. You can then `get` and `set` the session data in your Astro pages and components, API endpoints, Astro Actions, and middleware. The API and data are the same for each of them. 
```
Not strictly speaking necessary, but might visually provide a nice break from all the text, and does correspond to lines of code that will be highlighted below. Gives a sneak hint at the API itself, which I think is kind of nice. Totally a judgement call here!

In Astro components and pages, you can access the session object as `Astro.session`:

```astro 
---
// src/components/CartButton.astro
export const prerender = false;
const cart = await Astro.session.get('cart');
---

<a href="/cart">🛒 {cart?.length ?? 0} items</a>
```
The same session data is available in your Astro Actions:

```ts {9,11}
// src/actions/addToCart.ts
import { defineAction } from "astro:actions";
import { z } from "astro:schema";

export const server = {
  addToCart: defineAction({
    input: z.object({ productId: z.string() }),
    handler: async (input, context) => {
      const cart = await context.session.get("cart");
      cart.push(input.productId);
      await context.session.set("cart", cart);
      return cart;
    },
  }),
};
```

Sessions work on pages that are rendered on-demand, or they pair perfectly with [server islands](https://docs.astro.build/en/concepts/islands/#server-islands), letting you sprinkle islands of personalized content in an otherwise static site.

```astro
---
import CartButton from '../components/CartButton.astro';
---
<CartButton server:defer />
```

### Drivers

> Astro sessions are powered by [unstorage](https://unstorage.unjs.io/) drivers, which are modules that Astro uses to store the session data. Unstorage supports dozens of providers, giving you a world of choice for storing the user data.

Reviewer 3: `the` is unnecessary here
```suggestion
Astro sessions are powered by [unstorage](https://unstorage.unjs.io/) drivers, which are modules that Astro uses to store the session data. Unstorage supports dozens of providers, giving you a world of choice for storing user data.
```

>  When sessions are a stable feature, Astro's official adapters will automatically configure a default driver. But during this experimental phase you must configure a `driver` for your chosen adapter yourself. You can also use a cross-platform driver such as [Upstash](https://unstorage.unjs.io/drivers/upstash) or [Redis](https://unstorage.unjs.io/drivers/redis).

Reviewer 3: grammar, comma and whitespace nit
```suggestion
When sessions become a stable feature, Astro's official adapters will automatically configure a default driver. But during this experimental phase, you must configure a `driver` for your chosen adapter yourself. You can also use a cross-platform driver such as [Upstash](https://unstorage.unjs.io/drivers/upstash) or [Redis](https://unstorage.unjs.io/drivers/redis).
```

## Remote image caching

You already know and love the built-in `<Image />` component to [display optimized images](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/images/#display-optimized-images-with-the-image--component) with automatic resizing and optimization. While this component currently transforms both local and remote images, image caching between builds was limited to local images. 

Now, Astro will cache remote images as well, reducing the need to re-download and re-transform images on every build. It uses [conditional requests](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Conditional_requests#conditional_headers) with [`If-Modified-Since`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/If-Modified-Since) or [`If-None-Match`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/If-None-Match) headers to determine whether the image is still fresh, and will use the cached version unless the source image has changed. 

> This is now enabled for all sites, and will work with any host that supports conditional requests. See the new [asset caching docs](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/images/#asset-caching) for details. 

Reviewer 3: comma nit
```suggestion
This is now enabled for all sites and will work with any host that supports conditional requests. See the new [asset caching docs](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/images/#asset-caching) for details.
```

> Special thanks to [@oliverlynch](https://github.com/oliverlynch), who contributed this feature!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Special thanks to [@oliverlynch](https://github.com/oliverlynch), who contributed to this feature!
```

Author: The meaning is that the feature was oliverlynch's contribution

Reviewer: @yanthomasdev can you resolve this?

Reviewer 2: I will resolve on behalf of docs! I think it's fine as-is to imply ownership of the feature! Yan can take it up with me in the parking lot after class...

## `getActionPath` helper

> Using Astro Actions is as simple as calling `actions.like()` or `actions.addToCart()`. But sometimes you need to know the URL of an action so so you can make a `fetch()` request with custom headers, or use an API such as `navigator.sendBeacon()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using Astro Actions is as simple as calling `actions.like()` or `actions.addToCart()`. But sometimes you need to know the URL of an action so you can make a `fetch()` request with custom headers, or use an API such as `navigator.sendBeacon()`.
```
